He shot through the steel doors to get
into the house. Um, making it very clear
that he was going to kill us.
I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro and today I'm in
LA to speak with Charlie's Theren.
Theren's new film, Apex, is about a rock
climber who is also able to kick some
serious butt.
>> Let's do it.
So, I wanted to talk to her about what
motivates her to make action movies like
that.
>> We can't fight like men,
>> but that doesn't mean we can't fight.
>> And if overcoming her traumatic past has
anything to do with it,
>> I wasn't going to let anything take away
from my life. Some of it maybe has to do
with the fact that I experienced so much
death early on. Here's my conversation
with Charlies Theren.
>> Can we tell the folks outside to
>> Oh, of course. It's my team.
>> You're being way too nice. Shut up.
>> See, that works. They're too chatty.
We're all just a bunch of chatties. I
love it.
So, we're meeting uh the day after the
Oscars and uh I was watching um your
acceptance speech when you won your
Oscar for Monster in 2004. And you know,
you're standing on stage, you're tearing
up. Um it's clearly just this very
important moment, which of course it is
for any actor. Your mom is sitting in
the audience and you thank her for all
her sacrifices. You have sacrificed so
much for me to be able to live here and
make my dreams come true. And there are
no words to describe how much I love
you. When
>> you when you look back now, what what do
you think about that that young woman
and what was happening at that moment?
>> The first the first thing that came to
mind was just this is something that
this doesn't happen to girls in South
Africa. Like you know, it's like I
remember looking at a map and I was
like, "God, we're all the way down here.
God, what's going on up there? I
remember like feeling very lucky that I
made it out here and like my greatest
dream, like my like lottery win would
have been to be able to support myself
as an actor and not have a second job.
>> Like that was literally what I was like
aiming for. like not just aiming for it
like that would have been I just wanted
to like be able to support myself, not
depend on my mom or a guy, feel secure
and get to do the thing that I
absolutely love. But the thing with my
mom is very I'm going to try and talk
about it very professionally because I
will tear up. She did sacrifice a lot.
>> Yeah. And we're going to talk about
that. And you can tell just in that
moment, you know, the connection, the
just looking at each other.
>> Well, I couldn't look at her. I was
like, "I'm not going to look at you."
Like the first part of the speech, I I
handled it like I was like like just
really excited and shocked and I was
like, "Do not look at her. Do not look
at her." Cuz I knew that as soon as I
looked at her, I was going to feel I
just knew that cuz it's it was somewhat
of a shared experience.
>> Yeah. I can see you getting emotional
now.
>> No, I'm not. I don't know what you're
talking about.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's hard not to because
it's so real. you know, I'm a mom now
and I don't have to sacrifice the things
like she did. So, I know what she did
and and I'm very grateful. Yeah. I guess
since we started here, um
we'll we'll talk about the movie, but
since we're already talking about your
family and and you know, where where you
came from, um
you grew up in South Africa on a small
farm.
>> Yeah. Tell me about what you remember
about growing up there and what your
life was like.
>> I remember very vividly moving to that
farm. I I was 4 years old. Um
but I remember seeing it. I remember it
being feeling when I was that age like
so vast. It really was. And it was like
16 acres, but it just felt like this
like vast cuz it had it had I think they
were growing um alalfa on it and one
side they were growing corn on it. So,
it just had this kind of error of and
they had these two big reservoirs on it
and there was this big big tree and I
don't know what tree it was, but it was
kind of like it greeted you as you were
driving in and I have very very vivid
memories of this tree and climbing it
and climbing it recklessly barefoot um
and just feeling
it was like a sense of freedom for sure.
I
>> Were you like a tomboy? Were you an
athletic child? Yeah. No, I definitely
like liked adventure and I liked when I
think back now, my every day was filled
with kind of imagination. Like, you
know, I would go out and go to the
garden. I would imagine I was a chef and
I was going to it was always there was
always a story attached. You know, if
the dogs came with me, I was like
Sheena, Queen of the Jungle. When I
started watching movies, I really kind
of like started interpret interpreting
my movies into my everyday life. So
yeah, I loved adventure. I liked getting
into trouble, too. You know, I like to
do things that I knew I wasn't allowed
to do, but I was allowed to do so much.
Like, you know,
>> you like to kind of run wild.
>> Yes. Yeah. It was that that I I mean, I
could take my BMX out and go into like
the closest little town to go rent
movies. I mean, I would tell my mom,
>> right,
>> but she wasn't But I could do pretty
much anything that I wanted to do. H.
>> Did that make you sort of independent?
>> Yeah.
>> Growing up, you just felt like you had
the run of the world.
>> Yeah, I was super independent. I feel
like that's not unusual, though. I felt
like my friends kind of grew up that
way, too. I felt like my independence
also had to just come from like an
emotional place. You know, my house
wasn't always stable. And so I was I
felt very responsible to like make sure
that like I was taken care of like there
was this kind of thing that by the time
I moved out of the house I knew how to
take care of myself on many levels.
Before we get to what was going on
inside the house outside the house was
also a lot of instability. I mean, I was
looking at your town and, you know, the
mid1 1980s in particular were sort of a
time of violent uprisings against
apartheid. Um, that led to a state of
emergency in your hometown, Benoni. They
there was a lot of state repression,
resistance.
>> I mean, you were a very young kid, but
do you remember any of that? Did that
sort of play into how you saw?
>> Yeah, I think of that as kind of like
the next wave of my memories. Um because
it was you just you you couldn't avoid
it. Like violence and and turmoil was
something that was like everyday life in
South Africa. If you got in the car, if
I went to the bank with my mom, that was
something that you just saw on the side
of the roads. And for sure I I saw
things that I shouldn't have seen at at
a very young age when it concerning
violence because that was just the
circumstances. So there was a lot of
talk constantly about apartheite. It was
a hot topic. Like you'd go to a
barbecue, that's what everybody was
talking about. They weren't really
hiding it from the kids.
>> When you say you saw violence, what do
you remember anything in particular?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Like vividly.
That's like tough stuff to talk about. I
was like very young. I saw I saw a man
burn inside a car on the side of the
road.
Um, God and and a lot of people pulling
over and trying to help and not being
able to help.
Um, I also then later, you know, I saw
what HIV and AIDS was doing. Like
>> I remember people being wheelbarrowed
into our house because they knew my mom
would take them to a clinic. H
you know
you have spoken a lot about um
the turbulence outside but also as you
mentioned inside your family and
your father was an alcoholic. Um as
someone myself who's you know dealt with
alcohol abuse in in our family it is an
incredibly difficult thing especially
for a child to deal with.
When did you realize that your own home
life was maybe different than other
friends of yours?
>> That's a good question.
>> Um, pretty young, I would say. Really
young.
I have very like memories from when I
was really young seeing and it scared me
seeing drunk people, but like really
drunk people like people crawling on the
floor kind of drunk, you know. Um,
yeah. And it was scary in the beginning,
you know, like I remember vividly like
seeing my uncle like really drunk and I
was it was frightening. It was really
frightening. But that became so
consistent that that was every Friday,
Saturday, maybe even every Wednesday.
Like my dad had built this really big
bar inside the house. And
again, not very unusual. Like a lot of
South Africans have a like they love to
kind of create a space in their house
where they can drink
>> and barbecue and
>> Exactly. Exactly. But it became kind of
the live where he lived. It was where
you you never saw him anywhere else in
the house. You always saw him there in
the house.
>> Um and he was very he was a full-blown
functioning drunk.
It was, you know,
but he had moments in his life where he
would kind of like like go missing. Like
we just wouldn't know where he was and
he would usually kind of return in a
state that was pretty severe.
And that's, you know, it would get messy
and loud. And
um my mom's not a wallflower either, so
she wasn't just like sitting and taking
it, you know, she was definitely
Yeah. I mean, she made it known that she
wasn't happy about his lifestyle.
>> So, it caused because of both of them.
It really caused a lot of like verbal
abuse. And they also just the I honestly
personally for me, the worst thing was
they would ice each other. They wouldn't
talk to each other for like there was
like a big fight and then they wouldn't
talk to each other for like 3 weeks.
>> And I didn't have siblings and my house
just went silent.
>> It just went totally silent. like no one
would even say good morning to each
other and like I would be so scared to
say something.
>> So they would like for 3 weeks no one
would talk inside the house.
>> Did you feel like you had to mediate
that or you just wanted to not be
included in that?
>> Yeah. I wouldn't because it's South
Africa at that time when I was raised it
was like children should be seen and not
heard. You never said anything ever.
Ever. I remember one time saying
something to my dad and it was like I
was made very aware like you just don't
do that. It's got it's none of your
business.
>> Was he violent towards you?
>> I I mean violent he was scary in a sense
that wasn't like he didn't hit me. He he
didn't throw me against a wall, but he
would do things like he would drive
drunk and he would drive scary and they
would get into a fight and he would
like, you know, um you know, it was a
lot of kind of verbal abuse. He was
taking vi he would become violent on
things, you know. Um, but he
that was also just a lot of threatening
language, you know,
>> that just became normal. It really
became normal. And so I never I never
when I was younger stepped in um when I
was around 12, I think I remember my mom
or no, maybe even 13. And I remember my
mom using the divorce word for the first
time.
>> And divorce is just then was not I I
didn't we didn't know people who were
divorced. And my parents weren't
religious, but it was just culturally
one of those things like you just didn't
do that. Like so that was never kind of
even discussed. They had been married
for 25 years.
And so when she said like I think I
think the best thing for us is for me to
separate from him and
it doesn't make any sense. But it was so
scary because I didn't know what that
would look like. And so in a weird way I
was almost talking her back into like
staying.
>> Mhm.
>> Because the alternative felt so foreign
to me.
But I think she knew and she was trying
to figure out ways to I mean she sent me
to a boarding school specifically
because she she wanted me to get out of
the house. She knew that she had to get
me out of the house. I mean it was
getting to that point where she was very
aware what it was doing to me. M
>> so it was a combination of all of those
things just
it's like so strange to you know all cuz
all the memories are there
>> and it's not that I don't try and think
about it but it's just weird you're kind
of like going in such a linear manner
that it becomes almost more clear when
you talk about it that way cuz people
tend to just isolate it and talk want to
talk about one thing but it helps to
kind of explain
that these things build and they build
and it takes years sometimes
for things to go as wrong as it did in
my house.
>> The reason I actually wanted to go
linear is because you you have mentioned
in other interviews how everyone focuses
on what we're about to talk about, but
that
>> everything that came before was actually
where the real trauma lays.
>> Yeah. I mean there was definitely
>> made me curious.
>> Yeah, they were shocked because it's you
know a tremendous thing to happen in
anyone's life.
Um I'll just tell the part that um we
better talk about some fun things after
this.
>> We are going to talk about some fun
things.
>> That's all I have to say. Like
>> I didn't mean to start here.
>> No, not at all. Not at all. Um I was 15
years old
and my mom and I my mom would do this
thing too like she would she would take
me to the movies. Um and when my when I
was younger it was the drive in theater
and again like when I was older I
realized she was trying to get me out of
the house out of the house. But we had
gone to see a movie and
um my dad had taken the key to the
front. Sad. Not even the front door. The
front steel door. Every every room in
our house had a steel door. So if you
got into the front door, the kitchen had
a steel door that you had to unlock cuz
that's the kind of violence that we were
living in. Nonsensical violence. like
violence that you couldn't
reason with. It just
I mean our country was on the brink of
civil war. It was like it was
frightening.
So she couldn't get into the first lock
and we always knew where he was. His
brother lived a couple of streets away
and if he wasn't home, he was always
there drinking and nothing out of the
the usual. I mean, we went over and they
were pretty loaded and I had to pee
really badly. So, I ran into the house
to get to the toilet and he took that as
me being really rude because I didn't
stop and say hello to everybody.
Big thing in South Africa, like the kind
of respect that you have to have for
elders. and he was in a state where he
just kind of like spiraled like why
didn't you stop like like who do you
think you are and this kind of thing
started and but anyway um my mom had had
a pretty bad couple of weeks with him
and I think he felt like I was kind of
going through a stage of not you know I
wasn't just going to my room anymore I
was maybe getting involved or I would
protect protect her in the sense that I
would stand up for her and I don't I
think it it had built and that's why he
was spending so much time with his
family and um we left
but you could just tell you I I just
knew that that was kind of the straw
that broke the camel's back for him.
>> I felt it. I felt like something was
different. And when we got home, I sat
down with my mom and I said, "I think
you're right. I think you should
separate from him. I had I had never
imagined that those words would come out
of my mouth.
>> But leaving that house, I knew something
was just different. She knew it, too.
I knew he was mad at me. So eventually
when he decided to come home, I said to
her, "Please tell him I'm asleep." And
so I went into my room. I turned my
lights off. And because I just didn't I
was I was scared.
And I could always tell like my window
faced the drive. I could always tell by
the way he drove in
like the level of anger, frustration or
unhappiness
and the then the way he drove into that
property that night.
I don't I can't explain it to you. I
just knew something bad was going to
happen.
>> She knew it, too.
to get to the point. He finally broke
into the house. He shot his he shot
through the steel doors to get into the
house. Um, making it very clear that he
was going to kill us. His brother was
with him as well.
And yeah, we knew it was serious. And so
by the time he broke into the first
gate, my mom ran to the safe to get her
gun. She came into my bedroom.
And this is again one of those crazy
things. The two of us were holding the
door with our bodies cuz they weren't
there wasn't a lock on it and he just
stepped back and started shooting
through the door and not one bullet hit
us. It's insane when you think about it
that way. But the verbal I mean the
messaging was very clear. I'm going to
kill you tonight. Tonight it was
verbally very very clear. You think I
can't come into the store? Watch me and
I'm going to go to the safe. I'm going
to get the shotgun. Let me show you how
I can get through the store. that kind
of stuff.
>> Encouragement from the brother.
Um, and my mom, he had walked to the
safe and my mom pulled the door open
while the brother was still standing
there and the brother ran down the
hallway and she shot one bullet down the
hallway that ricocheted seven times and
shot him in the hand.
It's stuff you can't explain.
>> No.
um and then followed my father who was
by then opening the safe to get more
weapons out and she shot him.
Unfortunately, not an isolated story.
You know, these things are prevalent in
a lot of famil family's homes and I feel
like women really get a very very unfair
shake even in I feel like in this
country
>> um women who nobody takes it seriously
the situation that they're in and I
don't think anybody took my mom
seriously
>> in advance to this. You mean that
>> to how bad it was?
>> Right. You know, when you're dealing
with a charming drunk, like who could be
very charming and was always looking for
buddies to kind of like come join the
party,
>> there was a lot of and also a culture
that just accepted it. Like it was a
culture that that was part of being
South African like men drink.
And I remember my little tiny nephew
saying like when people are like, "What
are you going to do when you grow up?"
I'm gonna drink.
I like that was part of the culture.
That's when you become a man.
>> That doesn't help either.
>> I I just want to say um I I wasn't going
to start here um but because I asked you
um before the interview if it was okay
to talk about it. I guess that's where
that's why we've ended up um
>> ended up here.
>> Yeah. To be clear, I I think these
things should be talked about, you know,
um because it it makes other people not
feel alone, you know, and I feel like I
never knew about a story like that, you
know, when this happened to us. I
thought we were the only people, my mom
and I, that this was going on with.
>> And now the two of us look at it. I've
had therapy around this. She's had she's
also just she's a tough broad. So part
of her is just like it's part of my
life. It's not who I am.
>> I'm way more interesting than this. And
oh, is she more interesting than that.
So I know she won't mind this.
>> So yeah, it's a good way to, I think,
make people not feel alone. And you
know, I'm I'm not haunted by any of this
stuff anymore.
>> And in fact, you've become a campaigner
to prevent genderbased violence. You've
made its
very clear that trauma does not define
you.
>> It does mention bind you and your mother
though and and your story. How would you
say it changed your relationship to her
that moment?
>> It's a very good question because it
did. It really did change our
relationship. We were always very close.
We felt like a team.
Um,
but that night changed it because in
retrospect, like once I got out of the
shock of it, I realized that she saved
my life,
which is a big thing, you know.
>> Oh my goodness. It's the ultimate
sacrifice a mother can give.
>> Yeah. And then also the aftermath of
like she picked right up like she
this is I think such a testament to her
strength because the next morning she
sent me to school.
She was just like you're going to move
on. Not necessarily the healthiest thing
but it worked for us. She wanted me to
forget about it. She didn't want me to
like sit in it. We didn't have
therapists around. It wasn't like she
was going to say like go see a
therapist. we just didn't have access to
those things. So in her head, the best
therapy was
we have to move on. We can't like
sit in this.
>> And did you I mean in the sense that did
you like lock it away?
>> I did. Yeah. Because there was a lot of
shame kind of surrounding it as well
because I felt like everybody knew
they knew
how bad it was. Nobody stepped in to
help, but everybody knew. And then there
was like and like I feel like
kids had this kind of attitude towards
me. Like even though their parents were
in the same boat there I knew so many of
them and their parents to be alcoholics
there was this kind of energy that was
like
well yours is like really bad like that
that happened you know
>> not being aware that they were moments
away from having the same experience.
>> Do you think it branded like you felt
like they judged you and it kind of
separated you from them?
>> Yes. And I actually there was only one
time I became violent and it was um a a
girl had kind of like taunted me with it
and she was kind of walking around
telling everybody how she had seen my
dad drunk and you know this was
something that was super sensitive to me
cuz he would show up at school events
really drunk and it was really
embarrassing and not that a child I mean
I know this now but not that a child
should ever take that on. that's that
has nothing to do with you. But but when
you don't know that, you you make it
very personal.
I always felt like I had to make excuses
for him. I always had to like tell some
story to soften the edges a little bit.
>> And I think I did try to sweep it under
the rug because I also I hated people
feeling sorry for me. I hated it. I I
almost feel like that was the worst
thing was like that now for the rest of
my life people are going to feel sorry
for me. So for the first couple of
years, for as long as I could, I would
have told the story that he died in a
car accident and that it happened then
three years earlier. I couldn't tell it
to my school friends. But by the time I
left South Africa, that's the story I
told cuz I just I didn't want to like
have people show p I didn't I didn't
want pity. Made me so uncomfortable. So
you end up leaving South Africa.
>> Yeah. And
you're young. Um,
>> yeah, I had just turned 16,
>> which is amazing. And you go to model
initially in Italy. I just wonder what
it was like to be
that person at 16
with everything that had happened.
>> It was amazing.
>> Really?
>> It was amazing cuz it was expecting that
>> escapism. Oh, okay.
>> I could escape. The only thing that was
really really hard for me was knowing
that I was leaving my mom behind.
>> But she was the one that said, "You have
to go." Like, "You have to go. You got
go get out of here. Go and make a life
for yourself.
There's nothing for you here right now."
>> What was it like um once you got that
opportunity and you were out in the
world sort of living at at 16?
>> Yeah. Did you feel equipped? Yeah, I was
so equipped. I mean, I knew how to take
care of myself. That's just something my
mom instilled in me, my lifestyle
instilled in me, my country did.
>> Like, you just you know how to take care
of yourself. You know how to cook and
even in our school, they teach you how
to sew. I mean, I know more than my kids
will ever know as adults, you know,
about taking care of myself. And I also
had this real drive that I wanted to do
it on my own terms. Like, I didn't want
to go out there. She had given me a
credit card, but I would I was so
determined to do this on my own and to
not fail cuz I didn't want to go back. I
didn't want to go back.
>> So, I was running from a lot of stuff
>> and I was happy to escape it.
and you come to America and you you're a
dancer and you're studying at the
Joffrey Ballet
>> and you have a pretty serious um injury
or
>> it was a builtup
>> a builtup thing that you just sort of
ended up not being able to dance
anymore.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It was like a consistent
injury that showed up my knees. I was
too tall to be a dancer.
>> And by the time I got to Jeffrey
Joffrey, I was mainly taking class. M
>> um I think I was in full denial cuz I
didn't have another plan. I really
didn't have a plan for anything after
that.
>> And so was it must have been scary.
>> That was when it got scary. Yeah. I went
into like my first depression.
>> H
>> um
yeah, I lived in somebody's basement. I
was renting a room in this basement. It
didn't have any windows.
And I just remember it was like
really cold winter and I was living in
darkness, like complete darkness. And my
mom came over. She was really worried
about me.
And
I'll never forget it. We sat on like
this crappy couch that was covered with
a blanket cuz it was so disgusting. And
we both had a pint of ice cream and we
were just eating ice cream. And she just
said she she just said like, "You love
movies. You were always watching movies.
Always. That's all you did as a kid. You
watched movies. And then when you
started dancing, she's like, "News
flash. You were not a great dancer, but
you were the best actor. Like, you would
go on stage and you could tell the
story." She's like, "You know how to do
that."
>> And you had not thought about that.
>> No. No. I didn't even know how you went
about it. I had no idea how you went
about it. And neither did she. I mean,
it was like,
>> I'll buy the ticket, you'll go to
Hollywood. And
>> we got the ticket and I was like, h, it
doesn't say Hollywood. It says Los
Angeles. I mean, that is how naive we
were.
>> I was thinking a lot about how much
you'd experience from 15 to 18, which is
this period in which this all happens.
You leave, you have this traumatic
event, you go to Italy, then you go to
New York, you don't know what you're
going to do. Then you come to LA, you
get discovered
and
you'd lost a career, you'd found a
career maybe. I mean, this is most
people experience that in one lifetime.
I mean, did did you did you feel that
that already at by the age of 18, you'd
sort of gone through this enormous
change? I just remember excitement. I
really like once I got like out of my
dark hole,
there's something about your naive that
makes you not think about the
alternative in my Well, for me anyway, I
should speak for myself, but
>> I think that's true of young people
generally.
>> You just think like anything's possible.
>> Yeah.
>> And nothing bad's going to happen. And
not to you, you know, you just you think
you're invincible. And I had big dreams
and I had this kind of clock ticking cuz
I didn't want to go back. So I was
constantly kind of like like a hustler,
but I felt very I I just remember those
years very fondly. I was excited. I had
found this like really great group of
friends and I was going out and dance.
These were all things that I didn't grow
up with. You know in South Africa you
don't go to a club like you don't go
like during sec I mean we had I don't
think I I don't want to like some South
African going to be like that's not true
but my experience was that there wasn't
like concerts
>> I didn't go to concerts and I think even
>> boycots right so
>> yes exactly sanctions kind of like
stopped that but even prior to the
sanctions and I think even if there were
my mom would never let me go because
>> you'd hear of like crowd bombing and
things like that.
>> So, this was the first time you were
able to really be young.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> So, in fact, the opposite of what I
thought.
>> No, I was like dancing until the sun
came up and then I would go to auditions
and be great. Like, I was like I had no
sleep. I functioned on no sleep. I ate
terribly cuz that's what I could afford.
But I was so happy. I was so happy.
So,
this brings me actually to your new
movie. Um, because you've been doing a
lot of tough roles lately and you are
what I consider to be um our modern-day
action hero.
>> Oh,
>> do you consider yourself to be an action
hero?
>> I don't know about the hero part.
>> I'm making a kind of obvious assumption.
um considering where we've started, but
I've heard you just say words like
independent,
um self-sufficient,
you know, wanting to do things your own
way, and it to me there's just like a
very clear throughine to this version of
your career.
>> Yeah.
>> Why was that something that you were
attracted to? So, I had had little
moments in movies where I had to do like
an action scene, you know, it was like
stunt people would come in and it would
be like, "Oh, we're going to like th
There was like a big fight scene that I
had in Two Days in the Valley, my first
movie that I ever did.
I made the connection pretty quickly to
my dance career."
And the thing that my mom said was in
that moment became very clear to me. The
fact that I am I'm a natural storyteller
and if I have to do it through my body,
I'll do it through my body. If I can do
it through my mouth, I'll do it through
my mouth. And I had missed telling story
through my body.
>> You know,
you said in a recent interview,
I have surgery after every movie.
You said you wanted to get to the fun
stuff. And so I just have to bring this
up before we talk a little bit more
about this because
>> I actually looked into it.
>> Oh boy.
>> Our whole team did. And um and we were
just we went down a rabbit hole.
>> Uh after this new movie Apex, you got
elbow surgery.
>> Two elbow a revision. Yeah. One and a
revision surgery. Yeah.
>> You also fractured a toe. Yeah. Please
fill me in on the stuff that we've
missed. While making the Old Guard, you
filmed through injuries and got three
surgeries on your left arm afterwards.
Yeah. Is that right? Okay. Making Atomic
Blonde, you cracked two teeth and got
root canals.
>> Yeah. My teeth were replaced fully.
Yeah.
>> Fully.
>> Not my whole I have all my own teeth
even though some people don't believe
that. I took care of my teeth. Um two in
the back. Um they had to just they had
to remove them. They were so crushed.
I'll also say that one of the ones that
I left off is that you spent 5 days in
the hospital after laughing too hard
watching Borat.
I didn't quite understand. Was that like
a hernia that you got? Like
>> So I had herniated a disc in my neck
making a movie. I landed on my neck and
it was a really severe injury.
>> Oh my gosh.
>> I was moments away from being paralyzed.
It was actually that bad. I landed on a
concrete floor on my neck.
>> What movie was this?
>> On Ian Flux. Oh god.
>> And they had to shut the movie down. And
um I had an injury that everybody was
hoping my body could heal after I mean
they I was on bed rest and doing PT and
um but they were hoping that the disc I
was young enough
>> and the disc is really soft up there
that my body would absorb it and so they
didn't want to just do surgery straight
away.
>> And I think it was a big mistake because
I suffered for eight years and had
chronic pain. chronic pain and my neck
was that disc sat so close to all of my
nerves
that if I did anything wrong with it,
anything I didn't like, it would just
sit on nerves and I would just be locked
locked for weeks. And I lived my life
like that for eight years. And so the
Borat thing is funny because I laughed
so hard that I locked it. I locked that
disc into the nerves and it was actually
really bad. I had to like
>> Yeah, I was about to say it's not a
funny story. That's a horrible story.
It's a funny story now. I mean, we still
laugh about it,
>> but um I had to like get flown like on a
private plane that night and came back
to LA and and when I had my first baby,
I just said to the doctor, I want to
have the surgery because I I just don't
want to live in this place where I have
a child and I can't pick her up because
my neck is out. And so I I kind of like
>> it was the best thing I ever did. I know
a lot of people who've lived with
chronic pain and it's really
debilitating and really hard um to think
about anything else. What was it like
for you?
>> It was horrible. It's horrible cuz it's
constant fear of like I don't know if I
should do that and I'm like in the prime
of my life.
>> Um and then then it became so acute like
I would just get out of the shower and
reach for a towel and it would lock and
I would be in bed for 5 days not being
able to move. I think I was so worn down
by the end of the eight years that if
they weren't going to do it, I was gonna
like go to a country and get it done
where they would allow it to happen. I
was that desperate.
>> I was also, you know, I I shared with my
doctor
>> cuz I was on a lot of o opioids and
things like that.
>> About to ask
>> and if I if I you would think with my
dad as well like the worry of addiction.
Thank God I I I don't have an issue with
addiction and that I didn't become
addicted to them. But I think back now
and I just go like that was just
so irresponsible in a weird way with
myself. The fact that I was just
thinking I can kind of I I would be able
to control this somehow.
>> You know, if that were my reality, I
would then probably not want to throw
myself and become an action star. I
would want to protect myself from from
injury and those kinds of issues. Why do
you think you went in the opposite
direction?
>> I think I wasn't going to let anything
take away from my life.
>> I have there is a spirit about me that
and I think some of it maybe has to do
with the fact that I experienced so much
death early on.
>> I'm very aware that time runs out really
quickly and that time can run out as
soon as I walk out of this building. I
can cross the street and it's done. I'm
so hyper aware of that. I live my life
every single day like that. If I lay in
bed one day, I'm like I I am missing a
day in my life. But I was never going to
be I didn't want to live like a safe
life because of that. I mean, I do live
a very safe life. I'm not a reckless
person. I think people think I am, but
I'm not a reckless I I get scared. I'm
not reckless, but I don't wanna I wanna
if I get to be on my deathbed one day, I
want to say I did everything that I
really wanted to do.
>> Um, let's talk about Apex.
>> Yeah, I can see you getting tearing.
>> No, I'm not. I don't know what you're
talking about. Let's talk about Apex.
>> Tell me, but actually before I um move
on, what made you emotional?
>> Cuz life is so valuable. I I think like
life is so beautiful.
Stop it. No, this is not in the
interview. You are not putting this in
the interview. It's so sappy and stupid.
>> It's not.
>> It's so stupid. It's really stupid.
>> But h but this is But I feel like I'm
getting I'm getting the real you, which
is a person who still doesn't want to
like be in touch with their emotions.
>> It's so funny cuz people are always like
they think I'm a tough you know?
Like I think a lot of people think I'm
like very cold because I come across as
like self like I I can take care of
myself. like I don't need like and I'm
also I'm sometimes a little brash and I
think people take that as she's so tough
like she's so cold and it's the complete
opposite. My my kids are so embarrassed
by me cuz I will cry at the drop of a
hat. My kids are always like stop
crying. So I have access and I think
it's not to be like but I think it's why
I'm okay at acting. I I can go I can go
to those places very easily as as you
can tell
I get I have like an ability to really
feel deeply sometimes like you know it's
not nice but it works for my job and it
and it works in my life like
>> I really I appreciate I do appreciate
things and I'm not perfect at that every
day but I aim for that definitely.
>> Okay. Um because we keep on losing going
in a different direction which I have
enjoyed. But I want to talk about the
movie. In this new movie, you play a
mountain climber who ends up being
chased through the Australian jungle.
>> Rock climber.
>> Do your research.
>> Thank you.
>> Seriously.
>> Oh my god. But I'm wondering about the
mental challenges of doing movies like
that. I mean, what what are they for
you? Because it's not just a physical
game. It's a mental game.
>> Dance. Dance is probably one of the
hardest things I ever did. Dancers are
superheroes.
>> What dancers put their bodies through in
complete silence.
Um,
>> sorry, Timothy Shalom.
>> Oh boy, I hope I run into him one day.
Yeah, I feel like that was a very
reckless comment on an art form, two art
forms that we need to lift up constantly
because yes, they do have a hard time.
Um, but in about 10 years, I think AI is
going to be able to do Timothy's job,
but it will not be able to replace a
person on a stage dancing live. And we
shouldn't on other art forms. How
about we start with that? Um, I think
that it's one of the most disciplined
things that I've ever done. It taught me
discipline. It taught me structure. It
taught me hard work. It taught me to be
tough. Um, it's borderline abusive,
you know. I mean, I remember having to
dance with I had so there were several
times that I had blood infections from
blisters that just never healed. And you
don't get a day off. I mean, I'm
literally talking about bleeding through
your shoes. And that's something that
you have to like practice every single
day. You practice it every single day if
you're a dancer at that level.
>> You mean you practice the mindset?
mindset of just
>> and there's no other option like you're
going
>> you're going to keep going. I was just
wondering what you think about being a
woman in an action role because in this
particular film the tension doesn't only
come from the thrills and I don't want
to give too much away and you know you
and sort of physical extremes it also
comes through you as a woman feeling
threatened as many women feel threatened
by
the circumstances around you whether
there are men who are actually wishing
you ill or is a wild animal going to
come and overpower you.
>> Do you think female action heroes get
dramatic tension or need to get dramatic
tension from other sources than men?
>> For sure. Yeah. I
I I I think it's hard for some men to
understand that when we go down into a
parking garage, it's one of the most
fright. I mean, for me it is like
especially at night like um I get the I
get like a horrible feeling in a and
like one of those like deep parking
garages and underground parking lots. I
mean, I'm constantly looking over my
shoulder and then I'm trying to get into
my car as quick as possible.
>> I don't know how many men think about
that. We just have a different mindset
for sure. I think we have to
>> and that's what makes us interesting and
that's what makes us I think interesting
action stars or action uh subjects you
know I think we attack action
differently you know we can't fight like
men so but that doesn't mean we can't
fight so our tagline on Atomic Blonde
was always fight like a girl
>> because that's good that's good fight
like a girl it's different um I don't I
don't ever aspire to go into these
movies trying to like outdo
you know the male counterpart like I was
sitting opposite Taran and I was like he
was working out so I was like there's no
way you would totally overpower me like
if co-star
>> exactly Taran Edertton
>> I was like you would totally overpower
me so we have to like figure out other
things like maybe under certain
circumstances by element of surprise I
could do it but I've I I'm a bit of a
a stigler for reality. Like when I make
movies, like I want to know that you can
really do something. Like I'm always
kind of like on everybody's back like
can that happen? But what would happen?
Um I want to see that happen cuz I don't
believe that. Um because I love movies
because I believe it. Like I want to go
in there and believe it. So I like kind
of attacking action movies in that sense
that I want to make something that feels
very realistic. I'm not playing
superheroes.
In 2017, I interviewed um David Leech,
who directed You An Atomic Blonde, and
something he said to me was that indeed
it's different to fight as a woman. And
he is obviously someone whose background
is in being a stunt man.
>> Yeah.
>> And he said it's not about punching with
brute force, but it's about using
leverage. It's just a different way to
>> engage in physical conflict.
>> Can you fight in real life? Are you
someone who now feels like you could
take someone down?
>> I mean, how many times do we think about
that, Lulu? Like I like I don't think
about can I take people down, but I
always think
>> I do if I'm in a dark parking lot.
>> So, there's that part of my brain that
it's about defending yourself.
>> Yes. And I also think just given my
history, I'm hyper aware like of those
things. Um little things like fight with
your elbows. Your el Oh, weirdly. You
see, that's maybe why my elbows are so
busted. We're getting to some stuff
here. But in general, we have a lot of
force in our elbows. And we can swing
really hard from our elbows, not so much
from our wrists. So, you know, coming
forward with your finger. Yeah. But your
el this is a full force arm move. And
>> it can take somebody down if you hit it
in the right way.
>> I feel like I'm a scrappy. I'm scrappy.
>> I'm scrappy. And I'm a survivor. And I
feel like sometimes that's the thing
that sets you apart from actual skill.
You know, I think there are people that
would probably take somebody down way
better than I can, but if my life
depended on it,
I'm going to bet on me. All right. Thank
you for your honesty and also for
engaging with me. I really appreciate
it. Really?
>> Oh my gosh. You're so welcome and talk
to you soon.
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So, a few days later, we spoke
again.
Everyone good? Thumbs up. Thumbs up.
Okay. Hi.
>> Hi.
I was thinking
about everything that we've talked about
in our first conversation and you know
about the independence that you found at
an early age and then the tough
characters you've played and the
physical challenges that you've taken on
to play them.
And I know from other interviews that
you've given that you've really not
wanted your story to ever be distilled
to its most simplistic version. And I
really don't want to do that here. So
I'm wondering
when you think about your career, what
connections have you made between your
life and the choices that you've made
and your career at large?
>> First of all, thank you for saying that.
But I think it's like I do worry
sometimes that I I love having
conversation and and then you know I go
home and I'm like, "Oh, I share too
much. I didn't have to go into that
detail. Why did I say that?" Um
>> the stakes are really high for for
someone like you. I get it.
>> I appreciate you saying that. I feel
like
when we were talking, I was thinking
about this yesterday. when we were
talking it and by the way your
conversation is so natural so I want to
thank you for that too and it made me
think about things that I haven't
thought about in a while but I had a
thought that I don't feel like we talked
about and that is that you know the
opposite is so true of my life and of
South Africa the country that I grew up
in
and I think we covered the hardship but
there is a a gratefulness and a I really
truly feel blessed that I came from
there, that I was born there, that I
have that soil and my bones. I I feel
like I'm from there. I feel like I share
something with the people of South
Africa.
And
the reason I do is because they're the
most resilient, beautiful people that
you will ever meet. And they've been
through all this hardship, but they have
literally come out on the other side
with hope. And it's when I go there,
that's the most incredible thing to see.
Yes, there are a lot of things that need
to get fixed, but the heart of that
country is so unbelievably beautiful on
every level. It's truly the most
beautiful country that I've ever been to
and I've been lucky enough to travel a
lot and it's a place filled with joy.
And so I just wanted to kind of, you
know, talk a little bit about that
because that is such an important part
of the one side that we covered
yesterday. It's not all it's not all
doom and gloom, you know,
>> and uh
>> we got into a place sometimes that's the
way it goes,
>> but that's why this is good because you
kind of get to reflect, right? And that
that doesn't happen usually in
interviews. So, I'm grateful for that.
>> So, I know in our first interview we
talked a lot about your personal life. I
I want to talk about some of your work.
You founded a production company in 2003
and that was long before female actors
at least were sort of doing that were
taking that kind of ownership. Why did
you think it was important to have that
kind of power behind the scenes too?
>> You know,
I've reflected on this a lot. I think
I've always kind of jumped to a simple
answer which was I wanted to produce.
um felt like I was interested in movie
making like the whole thing the whole
part of it the development part of it uh
and that is true but you know if I had
to be really honest I feel like there
was a constant fear that I didn't have
control over my own work and especially
when you're young I I was
it happened when I made Monster I
remember the people who financed just
thinking we were making such a different
movie and they were really upset with us
with me and Patty Jenkins.
And I think that if we didn't have any
kind of producing power over that movie,
it would have been a completely
different movie. It it would not have
been the movie that Monster is today.
And it made me realize that it is good
to sometimes have a little bit of that
control where you can say, "Listen, we
were what we start this road together
and we're going to finish this road
together, but we told you what road
we're going on when we started, you
know, and standing up for that and being
able to protect that." I you know it's
funny because when you made Monster you
and Patty Jenkins and you know you
become it's obviously a very pivotal
part of your own story of how you had
this vision and really kind of created
it but there is something about it was
you and another woman who did that. So
when I'm hearing you say like it
wouldn't have been made in the same way.
What do you mean exactly?
>> I think uh I'm assuming here obvious
obviously um a lot of these people are
not around anymore and can't speak for
themselves. The the feeling that I got
and Patty and I discussed was that I
think they thought that they were going
to get some kind of a
more of a sexy version
uh with me and Christina Richi. I think
they were really leaning on kind of that
relationship part and I think they were
not expecting and I I honestly don't
think they had done a lot of research on
Eileen. I think they read the script, I
was attached and they just kind of said
yes to financing it. But if you really
do your research, it's pretty I mean
it's you don't have to explain it. You
know, you can look at all the
documentaries out there on her and
>> why why would you not try and kind of go
for the truth? I I don't know if they
thought that I would just kind of be me.
Maybe because I'd never done anything
like that. So I think that was maybe
another part too. They didn't think I
was going to do the full transformation.
I remember when I started getting
gaining weight and we went to one of the
producers threw a party for us and we
went to his house and I very kind of
like just jokingly I was like, "Oh my
god, I have a donut." And I was like
squishing my stomach and showing this
lady in front of me and it turned out it
was his wife and I just remember her
face and she was like I'm not going to
say the guy's name but she was like,
"John, like you should come see this."
like this kind of concern just came over
her and I think that was maybe the first
sign. But when they started seeing the
first dailies, I remember they were just
like, "You you don't look that great.
You're not smiling. You're not
friendly." It was I mean, it was evident
that they they really were not very
happy with the movie that we were
making.
>> I mean, some of your most well-known
roles are about transforming, right,
into real people. Monster, it run you an
Oscar. And then you also played Megan
Kelly in the movie Bombshell and you
were nominated for that role too. What
is the difference between creating a
character versus playing someone who
already exists in the world? That's such
a good question because I don't know if
I have the answer yet. I feel
I don't know how to play Eileene
without looking like Eileen. Like I
don't I don't think I'm the actor that
you should hire for that. I also don't
think I'm the actor you should put in
the in Bombshell to play Megan Kelly
because if I looked like this like me
and maybe attempted like her cadence, I
just I don't know what that is. Like I I
would look at the monitor and just kind
of feel like it's missing. Like
something's wrong, right?
I don't know how to do it. So I think
it's kind of like a necessity for me.
Now when I play non, you know, fictional
characters, I don't have to kind of obey
by that, right? But there are moments
where you read something and you kind of
feel like there's a physicality that you
think is maybe necessary. You talk to
your director, you start thinking about
things that can help you not be you,
right? I I I'm always trying to just not
look like I'm crossing a street like me
when I'm making a movie. I'm always
like, am I opening this door and is it
like Charlie is showing up? It's hard.
You know, I've made many movies. People
know who I am. And you don't want to
start overusing it in a way where it
feels like
you're just becoming caricatures, you
know? So, it it it takes a lot of
thought and a lot of collaboration to
kind of figure out what that is, what
the balance is. And
I I that's why I started. I don't really
truly know the answer yet.
You know, I've I've talked to actors and
they sometimes say that there's like a
little key that unlocks something for
them, you know, whether it's putting on
a wig or figuring out the way they walk
or um just something that opens up a
character. Do you have something like
that for you?
>> For me,
I wish I could re-shoot the first three
weeks of every movie I make.
>> Is that true?
>> I Yes. I feel like the first 3 weeks I
am not I am I'm scared. I'm still
thinking. I'm overthinking. I'm I'm
doing it and it passes but I am not in
that flow that you hear actors talk
about or athletes that that moment where
you're not thinking about anything. You
you're just in it.
>> Yeah. Three weeks that's usually. So, I
tried to shoot stupid things for like as
long as I can and then you just have to
put your big girl panties on and do it
like Yeah. Speaking of big girl panties,
um, MadMax Fury Road is of course one of
your most well-known roles and it was
famously grueling to film. My colleague
Kyle Buchanan wrote an oral history of
the movie that brought to light, you
know, how tough the set was, the filming
conditions, the the dynamics with your
co-star uh, Tom Hardy, the director
George Miller. But one of the things
that I found most interesting was how
you described your relationship with the
female actors on the set, including
Riley Kio and Zoe Kravitz. Um,
you said in that interview that they
turned to you as someone who could
problem solve for them, and I'm
wondering what that kind of looked like.
It was tough. You know, it it's an
environment that's really hard. It was
we were in a desert for six months and
um I think mentally it really challenged
all of us. It really did. And these poor
girls were in they were wearing bandages
and it was so cold. And I remember Abby
Lee one day just turning blue and I just
I was with the rig was just driving and
I was like like stop like everybody stop
and like trying to take like some of my
I think I tried to take my pants off or
something to like put pants on her at
least. Um like things like that that I
think was just kind of you know I had
just become a mom. Um, my first kid was
like, I think 2 months old. And I think
I was just in like hyper mom state, too.
You know, I loved all of those girls and
I felt like I felt like I I was somewhat
responsible for them because I was of
another generation and like I knew what
it was like to sometimes not feel like
you had a voice. I also want to add they
were all bad Like honestly,
they were really strong, capable curls.
like they were not wall flowers. So, I
just want to say that as well. They
didn't need saving.
>> All right. Um, last few questions.
Looking ahead, you're going to be in the
next Christopher Nolan film, The
Odyssey.
>> Um, I was literally on that movie for
like four breaths. It was so quick. Um,
but they were amazing breaths. uh
to have you know Chris Nolan say I would
like to meet you for my next movie is
like do we even need to meet cuz I'm in
like whatever it is I'll do it and uh
yeah I just spent like the last five
days with him and it was tremendous
really really tremendous to just kind of
see a director of that caliber work and
also to see my friend Matt Damon like
have this part it's like the part of a
lifetime and what he put himself through
and how hard he worked. So, it was a
lovely 5 days.
>> Um, you're going to be playing the witch
Cersei. I mean, what can we expect?
>> I I don't play her.
>> You don't? What do you play?
>> I just gave you some insight. I'm not
going to tell you, but I There you have
insight now. You know that it's not her.
Everybody thinks it's her, but it's
>> Everyone thinks it's her. Oh my
goodness. Okay. Um, any injuries though
on the set? No.
>> No. No injuries. No. I came out alive
and well. Yes.
>> All right, Chariss Theren, thank you so
much. This has been um it's been
wonderful.
>> The same here. It's definitely been
wonderful. It's very rare to have
conversations like this. So, thank you.
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro.
>> And I'm David Marches. and we're the
hosts of the interview, an audio and
video podcast from the New York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel so
you'll never miss an episode.